Add manuscript files for 2023 JOSS publication (#1855)
pvlib/pvlib-python: paper/paper.md

  - name: Mark A. Mikofski
    orcid: 0000-0001-8001-8582
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Adam R. Jensen
    orcid: 0000-0002-5554-9856
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Anton Driesse
    orcid: 0000-0003-3023-2155
    affiliation: 4
affiliations:
 - name: Sandia National Laboratories
   index: 1
 - name: DNV
   index: 2
 - name: Technical University of Denmark
   index: 3
 - name: PV Performance Labs
   index: 4

date: 13 September 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

pvlib python is a community-developed, open-source software toolbox
for simulating the performance of solar photovoltaic (PV) energy
systems.  It provides reference implementations of
over 100 empirical and physics-based models from the peer-reviewed scientific literature,
including solar position algorithms, irradiance models, thermal models,
and PV electrical models.  In addition to these individual low-level
model implementations, pvlib python provides high-level workflows
that chain these models together like building blocks to form complete
"weather-to-power" photovoltaic system models.  It also provides functions to
fetch and import a wide variety of weather datasets useful for PV modeling. 

> pvlib python has been developed since 2015 and follows modern best

Reviewer: Is there a reason we're saying 2015 here? The first commit was in 2013: 059ec272601b40affcc3a9c689018eb423ae3380. The first non-trivial commit was in 2014: 454467744fc4553115db05c1afadf1f0f08a5b10.

Author: Not sure!  Maybe I meant the first release was in 2015?  Regardless, the text is updated to say "developed since 2013".

repository additions (to code, documentation, tests, etc) over time.  The
project's repository currently comprises contributions from over 100 people
spanning industry, academia, and government research institutions.
\autoref{fig:community} (left) shows the number of unique repository
contributors over time, demonstrating continued and generally accelerating
attraction of new contributors.

![Total repository contributor count over time (left) and other community size statistics (right).\label{fig:community}](community.pdf)

However, the project as a whole is the product of not only of those who contribute
code but also those who submit bug reports, propose ideas for new features,
participate in online forums, and support the project in other ways.
Along those lines, two easily tracked metrics are the number of people
registered in the pvlib python online discussion forum and the number of
GitHub "stars" (an indicator of an individual's interest, akin to a browser bookmark)
on the pvlib python code repository.  \autoref{fig:community} (right)
shows these counts over time.  Although these numbers
almost certainly underestimate the true size of the pvlib community,

> their increase over time indicates continued and accelerating community growth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their increase over time indicates continued and accelerating community growth.
Since the 2018 JOSS publication, pvlib python has doubled the number of 
maintainers to bring in new perspectives and to better support the growing 
community.
```

---
title: 'pvlib python: 2023 project update'
tags:
  - Python
  - solar energy
  - photovoltaics
  - renewable energy
authors:
  - name: Kevin S. Anderson
    orcid: 0000-0002-1166-7957
    affiliation: 1
  - name: William F. Holmgren
    orcid: 0000-0001-6218-9767
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Clifford W. Hansen
    orcid: 0000-0002-8620-5378
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Mark A. Mikofski
    orcid: 0000-0001-8001-8582
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Adam R. Jensen
    orcid: 0000-0002-5554-9856
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Anton Driesse
    orcid: 0000-0003-3023-2155
    affiliation: 4
affiliations:
 - name: Sandia National Laboratories
   index: 1
 - name: DNV
   index: 2
 - name: Technical University of Denmark
   index: 3
 - name: PV Performance Labs
   index: 4

date: 13 September 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

pvlib python is a community-developed, open-source software toolbox
for simulating the performance of solar photovoltaic (PV) energy

> systems.  It provides peer-reviewed reference implementations of
> over 100 empirical and physics-based models from the scientific literature,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
systems.  It provides reference implementations of
over 100 empirical and physics-based models from the peer-reviewed scientific literature,
```

Reviewer 3: I think it's a shame that it no longer states that contributions to the package are peer-reviewed (as in our GitHub review and approval procedure). Perhaps we can add a new sentence stating that we employ rigorous peer-review of all contributions to the package?

Reviewer 2: I suggested moving the term because (to me) peer review means something specific - blind review refereed by a third party. We aren't doing that in pvlib, although all contributions go through some kind of review. Maybe we add "openly-reviewed" to the list of best practices in the next paragraph?

Reviewer 3: The peer review of this JOSS article will be open FYI ;)

But I see your point. I think our review often excels over regular peer reviews of journal articles. As long as it is mentioned in some form I am happy.

including solar position algorithms, irradiance models, thermal models,
and PV electrical models.  In addition to these individual low-level
model implementations, pvlib python provides high-level constructs
that chain these models together like building blocks to form complete
"weather-to-power" photovoltaic system models.  It also provides functions to
fetch and import a wide variety of weather datasets useful for PV modeling. 

pvlib python has been developed since 2015 and follows modern best
practices for open-source python software, with comprehensive automated
testing, standards-based packaging, and semantic versioning.
Its source code is developed openly on GitHub and releases are
distributed via the Python Package Index (PyPI) and the conda-forge
repository.  pvlib python's source code is made freely available under
the permissive BSD-3 license.

Here we present an update on pvlib python, describing capability
and community development since our 2018 publication [@pvlibjoss2018].

# Statement of need

> PV performance models are used throughout the field of solar phovoltaics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PV performance models are used throughout the field of photovoltaics.
```

The rapid increase in scale, technological diversity, and sophistication
of the global solar energy industry demands correspondingly more
capable models.  Per the United States Department of Energy,
"the importance of accurate modeling is hard to overstate" [@seto2022].

Compared with other PV modeling tools, pvlib python stands out in several
key aspects.  One is its reusable toolbox design, providing the user a

> level of flexibility beyond that of other tools.  Rather than organizing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
level of flexibility and customization beyond that of other tools.  Rather than organizing
```

Reviewer 3: Maybe not grammatically correct, but I think it would be nice to add customization/customizable

the user interface around pre-built modeling workflows, pvlib python
makes the individual "building blocks" of PV performance models accessible to

> the user.  This allows the user to assemble their own model workflows, including
> the ability of incorporating their own custom modeling steps.  This flexibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the user.  This allows the user to assemble their own model workflows, including
the ability of incorporating custom modeling steps.  This flexibility
```

is essential for applications in both academia and industry.

Another key aspect of pvlib python is that it is used via

> a general-purpose programming language (Python).  In addition to being more
> generally flexible, powerful, and scalable than a traditional
> graphical user interface, pvlib python's interface as a programming library
> allows it to be combined with other Python packages.  This enables
> integration with database query, data manipulation, numerical optimization,
> plotting, and reporting packages, to name a few.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a general-purpose programming language (Python), which
allows pvlib python functions to be combined with capabilities in other Python packages,
such as database query, data manipulation, numerical optimization,
plotting, and reporting packages.
```

A final key aspect of pvlib python is its open peer review approach and
foundation in published scientific research, allowing it to be developed by
a decentralized and diverse community of PV researchers and practitioners
without compromising its focus on transparent and reliable model
implementations.

> These core tenets, along with sustained contributions from a passionate and
> committed community, have lead to its widespread adoption across the PV

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These key aspects, along with sustained contributions from a passionate and
committed community, have led to pvlib python's widespread adoption across the PV
```

field [@Stein2022].  In support of the claim that pvlib python provides
meaningful value and addresses real needs, we offer these quantitative metrics:

1. Its 2018 JOSS publication, at the time of this writing,
ranks 14th by citation count out of the 2000+ papers published by JOSS to date.
2. The Python Package Index (PyPI) classifies pvlib python as a "critical project"
due to being in the top 1% of the index's packages by download count.
3. The project's online documentation receives over 400,000 page views
per year.

> 4. pvlib python was found to be the third most used python project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. pvlib python was found to be the third most-used python project
```

In response to the recent rapid increase in deployment of bifacial PV,
a capability enhancement of particular note is the inclusion of models for simulating
irradiance on the rear side of PV modules.
Other notable additions include methods of fitting empirical PV performance models
to measurements and models for performance loss mechanisms like soiling and snow
coverage.  
\autoref{fig:functions-comparison} summarizes the number of models (or functions)
per module for pvlib python versions 0.6.0 (released 2018-09-17) and 0.10.1
(released 2023-07-03), showing a substantial capability expansion over the
last five years.

![Comparison of public function counts for selected pvlib modules for v0.6.0 and v0.10.1. Some modules are smaller in v0.10.1 due to moving functions to new modules (e.g. from `pvsystem` to `iam`).\label{fig:functions-comparison}](functions_06_010.pdf)

Second, in addition to the new function-level model implementations,
the package's high-level classes have also been expanded to support
the complexity of emerging system designs, including heterogneous systems whose
subsystems differ in mounting or electrical configuration and systems that require

> custom orientation/steering models.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
custom orientation/tracking models.
```

Third, the creation of `pvlib.iotools`, a sub-package for fetching and importing
datasets relevant to PV modeling.  These functions provide a standardized
interface for reading data files in various complex data formats, offering
conveniences like optionally standardizing the dataset variable names and units
to pvlib's conventions [@pvlibiotools].  As of version 0.10.1, `pvlib.iotools` contains
functions to download data from over ten online data providers,
plus file reading/parsing functions for a dozen solar resource file formats.

These additions are discussed in more detail in [@pvpmc_2023_update] and [@pvpmc2022_pvlib_update].
Complete descriptions of the changes in each release can be found in the
project's documentation.

# Community growth

It is difficult to comprehensively describe the community around

> open-source projects like pvlib python, but some aspects of it are more easily
> quantifiable than others.  Here we examine the community from a few convenient

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
open-source projects like pvlib python, but some aspects can be
quantified.  Here we examine the community from a few convenient
```

> perspectives, but we emphasize that this section is necessarily a limited view of
> the community as a whole.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
perspectives, emphasizing that these metrics provide a limited view of
the community as a whole.
```

First, we examine contributors to pvlib python's code repository.  The
project's use of version control software enables easy quantification of
repository additions (to code, documentation, tests, etc) over time.  The
project's repository currently comprises contributions from over 100 people
spanning industry, academia, and government research institutions.

> \autoref{fig:community} shows the number of unique repository

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\autoref{fig:community} (left) shows the number of unique repository
```

contributors over time, demonstrating continued and generally accelerating
attraction of new contributors.

![Total repository contributor count over time (left) and other community size statistics (right).\label{fig:community}](community.pdf)

However, the project as a whole is the product of not only of those who contribute
code but also those who submit bug reports, propose ideas for new features,

> participate in online fora, and support the project in other ways.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
participate in online forums, and support the project in other ways.
```

Both are correct, but fora sounds archaic.

Along those lines, two easily tracked metrics are the number of people
registered in the pvlib python online discussion forum and the number of
GitHub "stars" (an indicator of an individual's interest, akin to a browser bookmark)

> on the pvlib python code repository.  \autoref{fig:community}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on the pvlib python code repository.  \autoref{fig:community} (right)
```

shows these counts over time.  Although these numbers

> almost certainly substantially underestimate the true size of the pvlib community,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
almost certainly underestimate the true size of the pvlib community,
```

their increase over time indicates continued and accelerating community growth.

In addition to continuous interaction online, community members sometimes
meet in person at user's group and tutorial sessions run by pvlib python
maintainers and community members alike.
To date, these meetings have been held at the IEEE Photovoltaics Specialists
Conference (PVSC), the PVPMC Workshops, and the PyData Global conference.
\autoref{fig:timeline} shows a timeline of these meetings, along with other
notable events in the project's history.

![pvlib python major event timeline: releases (top), community events (middle), and other project milestones (bottom).\label{fig:timeline}](timeline2.pdf)

> Finally, it is worth pointing out that pvlib python contributors and users
> are part of a broader community around not just pvlib python itself
> but also other members of the pvlib software "family": pvanalytics, a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, it is worth pointing out that pvlib python contributors and users
are part of a broader community for the pvlib software "family", which includes pvanalytics, a
```

---
title: 'pvlib python: 2023 project update'
tags:
  - Python
  - solar energy
  - photovoltaics
  - renewable energy
authors:
  - name: Kevin S. Anderson
    orcid: 0000-0002-1166-7957
    affiliation: 1
  - name: William F. Holmgren
    orcid: 0000-0001-6218-9767
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Clifford W. Hansen
    orcid: 0000-0002-8620-5378
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Mark A. Mikofski
    orcid: 0000-0001-8001-8582
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Adam R. Jensen
    orcid: 0000-0002-5554-9856
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Anton Driesse
    orcid: 0000-0003-3023-2155
    affiliation: 4
affiliations:
 - name: Sandia National Laboratories
   index: 1
 - name: DNV
   index: 2
 - name: Technical University of Denmark
   index: 3
 - name: PV Performance Labs
   index: 4

date: 13 September 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

pvlib python is a community-developed, open-source software toolbox
for simulating the performance of solar photovoltaic (PV) energy

> systems.  It provides reference implementations of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
components and systems.  It provides reference implementations of
```

over 100 empirical and physics-based models from the peer-reviewed scientific literature,
including solar position algorithms, irradiance models, thermal models,

> and PV electrical models.  In addition to these individual low-level

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and PV electrical models.  In addition to individual low-level
```

"weather-to-power" photovoltaic system models.  It also provides functions to
fetch and import a wide variety of weather datasets useful for PV modeling. 

pvlib python has been developed since 2013 and follows modern best
practices for open-source python software, with comprehensive automated
testing, standards-based packaging, and semantic versioning.
Its source code is developed openly on GitHub and releases are
distributed via the Python Package Index (PyPI) and the conda-forge
repository.  pvlib python's source code is made freely available under
the permissive BSD-3 license.

Here we (the project's core developers) present an update on pvlib python,
describing capability and community development since our 2018 publication
[@pvlibjoss2018].

# Statement of need

PV performance models are used throughout the field of photovoltaics.
The rapid increase in scale, technological diversity, and sophistication
of the global solar energy industry demands correspondingly more
capable models.  Per the United States Department of Energy,
"the importance of accurate modeling is hard to overstate" [@seto2022].

Compared with other PV modeling tools, pvlib python stands out in several

> key aspects.  One is its reusable toolbox design, providing the user a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
key aspects.  One is its toolbox design, providing the user a
```

level of flexibility and customization beyond that of other tools.  Rather than organizing
the user interface around pre-built modeling workflows, pvlib python
makes the individual "building blocks" of PV performance models accessible to
the user.  This allows the user to assemble their own model workflows, including
the ability of incorporating custom modeling steps.  This flexibility
is essential for applications in both academia and industry.

Another key aspect of pvlib python is that it is used via
a general-purpose programming language (Python), which
allows pvlib python functions to be combined with capabilities in other Python packages,
such as database query, data manipulation, numerical optimization,
plotting, and reporting packages.

> A final key aspect of pvlib python is its open peer review approach and

Reviewer 5: Maybe say, “foundation *on* published…” versus “in” because I think of building on top of foundations?

Second, in addition to the new function-level model implementations,
the package's high-level classes have also been expanded to support
the complexity of emerging system designs, including heterogeneous systems whose
subsystems differ in mounting or electrical configuration and systems that require
custom orientation/tracking models.

Third, the creation of `pvlib.iotools`, a sub-package for fetching and importing
datasets relevant to PV modeling.  These functions provide a standardized
interface for reading data files in various complex data formats, offering
conveniences like optionally standardizing the dataset variable names and units
to pvlib's conventions [@pvlibiotools].  As of version 0.10.1, `pvlib.iotools` contains
functions to download data from over ten online data providers,
plus file reading/parsing functions for a dozen solar resource file formats.

These additions are discussed in more detail in [@pvpmc_2023_update] and [@pvpmc2022_pvlib_update].
Complete descriptions of the changes in each release can be found in the
project's documentation.

# Community growth

> It is difficult to comprehensively describe the community around

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is difficult to fully describe the community around
```
